---
layout: post
title: Courses
tags: sidebar
css-id: courses
---

Courses are your opportunity to get *expert guidance while you learn about a topic in depth*. I'll help you structure and organize your learning, answer questions, and get past sticking points. I'll guide you on topics that I've studied myself and become an expert on, and help you gain more expertise. I'll give personalized recommendations on what materials to study and what activities to do in order to make efficient learning progress.

These are individual courses, not group courses. They're self-paced (you'll do lots of activities on your own, it's not like university where you spend a lot of the course time listening to lectures). It's recommended to get help, interaction and feedback from peers (and some other experts) by discussing your course work on the public [Fallible Ideas discussion group](http://fallibleideas.com/discussion).

During a course, we'll interact over email, instant message, and audio call. I'll help you get started with a plan and check back on your progress regularly and correct any misconceptions you have. You will read books and articles, write notes and outlines, highlight important parts, ask questions, use video and audio content, and more. You will learn how to learn in addition to learning about the primary course topic.

Students are responsible for buying their course materials, like books and videos. Note that materials listed are subject to change. I customize each course to the student, and will make suggestions for other materials depending on the student's prior knowledge, progress in the course, and what will work best for that student. I'll often use some sections from other books or some online articles.

Here are the available courses (other courses can be created by request in areas where I'm an expert):

## Introduction to Popperian Epistemology

How does learning work? How do we know whether an idea is good? Around 1960, Karl Popper rebuilt the field of epistemology with his fresh answers to these age-old questions. Most experts had always known that induction was flawed; Popper expanded the criticisms to be more thorough and took them seriously instead of thinking it must work, anyway, somehow. But Popper didn't stop there, he invented a new *evolutionary epistemology* which provided a better approach. Because Popper's ideas are such a large advance, they aren't yet widely understood – but you can learn them today.

This course will help you understand Popper's key insights into epistemology. Using original source materials together with commentary by Elliot Temple, you'll learn about learning and evaluating ideas. You'll get a clear understanding of the prevailing, mainstream view (induction and justificationism), see why the prevailing view is wrong, and learn Popper's improved view (conjectures and refutations). With the help of Elliot Temple's expert feedback and guidance, you can become skilled enough with Popper's ideas to apply them to decision making in your life. These aren't just ivory tower abstractions, they can help with personal decisions, hobbies or business productivity.

**Course Materials:** Popper book sections [listed here](http://fallibleideas.com/books#popper). Expect to go through the material from the first 3 books (green headings) at the top.

**Duration:** 3 months

**Price:** $4500

**Sign Up:** Email [et@elliottemple.com](mailto:et@elliottemple.com)

## Eli Goldratt

Eli Goldratt was a great philosopher who specialized in improving businesses. In this course, you'll learn his best ideas and how to use them to improve your business’s processes. They especially help decision makers. If you aren't a decision maker yet, but you'd like to be one, then it will still help you: you'll be able to suggest ways to improve the business you're at to impress your manager, and the best way to get promoted to a position that makes more decisions is to develop the skill to be successful at that position and then start taking on some of the responsibilities before having the job title.

Topics covered include constraints, drum buffer rope, focus, goals, limitations, margins of error, local optima, simplicity, critical chains, win/win solutions, conflict resolution without compromising, intuition, emergencies, the scientific method, resisting change, silver bullets, effect cause effect, and socratic questioning. You'll learn how to understand and use these ideas in a practical, effective way, rather than only seeing them as buzzwords like most people do.

**Course Materials:** Books by Eli Goldratt, like *The Goal* and *The Choice*, and my [Eli Goldratt videos](https://gumroad.com/l/TpyYV).

**Duration:** 3 months

**Price:** $4500

**Sign Up:** Email [et@elliottemple.com](mailto:et@elliottemple.com)