---
layout: page
title: "Free Liberalism"
permalink: /free-liberalism
---

*Liberalism* is a political philosophy that favors *liberty, reason, peace and private property*. Liberalism lifted the West out of poverty in the Industrial Revolution, but now socialists and authoritarians have hijacked the word “liberal”.

Liberal ideas include *free trade* (laissez-faire capitalism), *individual freedom* (individualism), *limited government* (a freedom-respecting government which prefers to leave people alone), *equality before the law* (no special privileges, no favored individuals or groups), and *freedom of conscience* (freedom to think for oneself, freedom from intellectual authorities). Liberalism *rejects violence* in favor of *reason*, and seeks *social harmony* – peace between all individuals and groups (including classes, families, professions, religions, castes, cities, nations).

**Liberal** means (from the Oxford English Dictionary):

- (Economics.) Favouring or characterized by unrestricted trade.
- Designating any of various political parties advocating individual rights and freedoms;
- Supporting or advocating individual rights, civil liberties, and political and social reform tending towards individual freedom or democracy with little state intervention.
- Free from bias, prejudice, or bigotry; open-minded, tolerant; governing or governed by relaxed principles or rules;

**Free Liberalism** means:

- The original, pro-freedom type of liberalism.
- Freeing the word "liberalism" from the anti-liberal advocates of socialism, wealth redistribution, more powerful government, trade restrictions, and other authoritarian policies.
- Sharing ideas about liberalism that don't cost money.

# Articles

[Liberalism: Reason, Peace and Property](/liberalism). I'm really happy with this overview article. In the future I will add articles covering some topics in more detail.

[Public Goods](/public-goods).


# Get Updates

Sign up for the Fallible Ideas Newsletter to be notified when new articles are added to this site, and to get 2-4 emails per month with philosophy links, writing and news.

{% include newsletter.html %}